---
layout: post
title: What is Mits and Pi?
date: 2016-05-04
---
It was just another evening when I was checking my Facebook messages when this came up from my friend.
"So I was just reading about [Graham's Number](http://waitbutwhy.com/2014/11/1000000-grahams-number.html) when suddenly a [wild question](http://waitbutwhy.com/table/how-long-would-you-live-if-you-could-choose-any-number-of-years) appeared! If you could choose to live any number of years, how long would you live for?" [Continue...](http://mitsandpi.com/blog/2016/05/04/what-is-mits-and-pi)

The website he linked to was Wait But Why, a blog with posts covering everything from artificial intelligence to extraterrestrial life to philosophical thought experiments to dealing with procrastination. While the cartoons, stick people drawing, and conversational language the author uses can seem amusingly simplistic, I have never seen anyone explain so many complex concepts so vividly. 

Reading a Wait But Why post is nothing like reading just another science or philosophy book (and let's not even get started on textbooks). It's more like having one of those late-night discussions with a weird and interesting friend. This friend never runs out of fascinating stories to tell. His curiosity sends him into hours of reflection, digging deeper into the topic and revealing new perspectives that always surprise you. You two start talking about, for example, the recent announcement of Tesla's new car, and he asks [why it's such a big deal](http://waitbutwhy.com/2015/06/how-tesla-will-change-your-life.html). Sure, electric cars are kind of cool, but he wants to know if it's more than just another novelty gadget. With most friends, the conversation would have just left off as that.

But for him, it's just the beginning of a huge rabbit hole as the two of you spend the next few hours digging every bit of information about electric cars to the rock bottom. It turns out that, in order to understand the magnitude of the electric car's impact, you must "zoom out" and look at the entire history of how humans used energy. He shows you the arguments and counter-arguments, the data packaged in stick-people drawings and stories as you attentively listen, following one idea after another and eagerly waiting for more. By the end of the evening, whether or not you agree with everything he talked about, you don't look at electric cars the same way ever again.

Since that first post about Graham's Number over a year ago, I have spent probably hundreds of hours reading (and procrastinating) on that website, and each new post always blows my mind. When I usually see an interesting article, all I think about the topic is "hmm, cool."  When I show an article about some new science discovery to my friends, more often than not they like it too, but rarely does the reaction become anything more than a polite "that was really interesting!" However, When I read a WBW post, something about this blog's style always made me think much harder about the topic than that. I call this the "Wait But Why Effect" (WBW Effect) : the effect of an explanation so engaging that you go "woah, now I need to take a step back and rethink about my meaning in the universe" instead of "hmm, interesting, but why should I care?"

So what is going on? How does Wait But Why explain complicated concepts in such a simple and engaging way? How do they strip away the complicated technical vocabulary without compromising their content? Why is the usual reaction so much more than a "hmmm, that was pretty interesting"?

What does it take to explain something *really well*?

Also, what got me wondering is whether it's possible to explain mathematics in the same way. 

Mathematics might be the last thing most of us would associate with "fun." The word "math" triggers memories of regurgitating the times table, cramming formulas before that exam, madly copying down the teachers' notes in class, and computing one number after another for hours. The math puzzles that are supposed to be recreational are also very difficult, and serve more often to frustrate than to inspire. At first glance, math-land might be the last place where anyone wants to find "woah moment" material. Most of us walk through math-land only when we absolutely have to, ie. not very often in daily life. 

But underneath math-land's seemingly desolate landscape, there is a huge *gold mine* of WBW-Effect-inducing ideas. We don't need to be mathematicians to start digging. We also don't need to be able to solve those frustrating puzzles that were supposed to be fun. Just like most of us can engage with science through popular science writings, it's also possible to understand the mind-bending ideas in math without being a mathematician. 

Learning mathematics can be confusing and frustrating. Sometimes no matter how hard we try to wrap our heads around those equations, it still doesn't click. Whether in classes or online, many explanations either go over important steps too quickly, or allocate too much details to less important sections and dilute the big picture. Also, when we struggle understanding something, it is often because we're missing some pre-requisite knowledge as well. Therefore, a good math explanation must not only cover the topic at hand, but also fill in the relevant gaps in the missing prior skills.

Tim Urban, the writer of Wait But Why, often used the metaphor of a tree to explain how we learn knowledge:

>*I’ve heard people compare knowledge of a topic to a tree. If you don’t fully get it, it’s like a tree in your head with no trunk—and without a trunk, when you learn something new about the topic—a new branch or leaf of the tree—there’s nothing for it to hang onto, so it just falls away. By clearing out fog all the way to the bottom, I build a tree trunk in my head, and from then on, all new information can hold on, which makes that topic forever more interesting and productive to learn about. And what I usually find is that so many of the topics I’ve pegged as “boring” in my head are actually just foggy to me—like watching episode 17 of a great show, which would be boring if you didn’t have the tree trunk of the back story and characters in place.* (From his [Tesla](http://waitbutwhy.com/2015/06/how-tesla-will-change-your-life.html) post)

Maybe this is one of the factors behind the "Wait But Why Effect." Popular science articles that skim the surface of new discoveries can do a decent job at showing why it's interesting. However, they are usually too brief to include the "tree trunk" material: background and context. The "leaves" can be cool, but without seeing it in relation to more foundational knowledge, our grasp of them can be "foggy" at best. Perhaps it explains why so few articles inspire a stronger response than "hmm, interesting, but why should I care." But when we do build a sturdy tree trunk, we can much better appreciate the significance of the leaves.

Foggy tree trunks can make science boring at worst, but it makes math utterly incomprehensible. Every idea in math is built upon previous ideas and assumptions. To fully understand how the Pythagorean Theorem works, we must first understand the parallel line theorems and triangle congruence theorems (among others), going back to the very definitions of point, line, and angle. To fully understand the math behind internet encryption, we have to go back to the basic notions of the greatest common divisor, and slowly build our way up through a myriad of theorems. Without these tree trunk knowledge, we sometimes can't even wrap our heads around the *statements* of important problems, let alone their solutions. However, reading Wait But Why has made me optimistic that the right kind of writing can always provide this solid tree trunk, even for those unfamiliar with math. 

At the end of the day, mathematics is beautiful. Learning about mathematics has seriously influenced how I look at the world. While few of us look to math-land with fond memories, we should keep in mind that its dreary landscape of rocks and ashes is only an appearance, not the spirit. It is how math is usually presented to us, through rapid-fire lectures and dense textbooks. While this rigour is necessary for a serious mathematician, it can be overwhelming for the rest of us. Often we lose ourselves tangled up in the details, losing sight of the big picture of the purpose behind mathematics and ultimately leading to frustration.

But we should remember that beneath the dreary surface, there is a gold mine of fascinating ideas that just need to be explained properly and patiently. With proper guidance, even the non-mathematician can take a step back and look at some math fact they know, and ask: "why is this true? What is its significance?", and they would almost always spiral down towards some "woah" realization. And what better way to guide the reader in this plunge, than having that one curious friend close by, constantly asking questions and examining the foundations of our knowledge? 
 
This is what Mits and Pi is about. I want to take a shot at trying to explain the cool ideas in mathematics and make them stick. I want to move past the "that was interesting," and into the "Wait But Why Effect." I am not a professional writer and it will be quite difficult, but I think I'm ready to have a try anyways. While Wait But Why inspired me, I intend to maintain my own style. 
